---
title: Biography
layout: base.njk
---

Growing up in multiple locations across India, I developed an early fascination with science, computers, and mathematics, inspired by influential books like Stephen Hawking's *A Brief History of Time* and Carl Sagan’s *Cosmos*. This curiosity led me to pursue a Bachelor's degree in Computer Science and Engineering (2008-12), where I specialized in computer vision, algorithms, and image processing. My interest extended beyond technical skills; I became increasingly driven by the potential for technology to address broader societal challenges. My motivation to leverage technology for societal good led me to undertake postgraduate studies in Innovation and Experience Design at the Srishti School of Art, Design & Technology (2013-15). At Srishti, I explored creative problem-solving, integrating design thinking with technical expertise to address real-world issues. It was here that I developed a deep vocabulary for human-centered design (HCD), aiming to develop interventions that are transparent, accessible, and empowering.

From 2008 to 2015, I worked independently as a designer, working with several global companies, developing *Mathscapes* — a project dedicated to creating accessible design tools through mathematics. From 2017 to 2022, I worked as a faculty member and researcher at Srishti-Manipal, where I helped students through principles of Human-Computer Interaction (HCI), mathematics, and programming. My role as a designer and researcher enabled me to provide students with a unique perspective on both technology and design, emphasizing ethical and user-centered approaches to technology. In 2022, I left Srishti to pursue further studies, continuing to merge mathematics, computation, and ethics in my work. My work in machine learning and HCI is grounded in principles that prioritize transparency and accessibility, aiming to address broader societal challenges. Today, I focus on the intersection of ML, HCI, and engineering, striving to make data analysis more accessible while always considering the societal and ethical dimensions of technology. Fascinated by the potential of technology to empower, I believe that data and computation, when approached thoughtfully, can create solutions that respect users and society alike. Transparency, accessibility, and empowerment are the foundations of my approach to technology development.

Looking ahead, I am eager to continue advancing solutions that sit at the intersection of ML, HCI, and engineering, shaping a future where technology remains as responsible as it is innovative.

[Email](mailto:hi@gvsh.cc)
