---
title: Personal statement, 2022
layout: base.njk
date: 2022-09-20
permalink: /2022/personal-statement/
---

### Introduction and Motivation
As a researcher and educator from India, I have experience in various roles that have enabled me to develop diverse skills. In my last role, I served as a full-time faculty member and facilitated Experimental Maths Lab at Srishti Manipal Institute. I taught students mathematics, algorithms, and human-computer interaction courses in this ca- pacity. My computer science background and an affinity for visual arts led me to develop a strong interest in image processing. This field combines mathematical functions to analyze and manipulate images. Alongside my academic pursuits, I run Mathscapes, where I build more accessible tools for research and design with maths. Additionally, I have served as a Design Copilot at Topcoder Inc. for several years, which has given me practical experience in solving real-world problems using technology.

I am now looking for a Masters program in computer science to further my understanding and contribute to developing novel solutions in machine learning in conjunction with HCI. I am eager to continue exploring the inter- section of mathematics and computer science, and a Masters program will provide me with the tools and resources necessary towards a research position after that.

_Primary_. Application of image processing and machine learning techniques to engineering.

_Secondary_. High-performance visualization tools, large-sized graphs, optimal graph drawing algorithms, OpenGL or WebGL contexts, algorithmic explainability, natural science, tacit knowledge, human-computer interaction (HCI), artificial intelligence, interaction design, ethical conflicts, open-access knowledge, archiving, accessibility beyond internet, open source, lesser-restricted licensing, recreational mathematics, pedagogy, engaging learning environments, mathematics activities.

### Academic Background and Research Experience

_Undergraduate studies and projects._ During my final years of school, I became interested in computer science, which led me to pursue a degree that would serve as a solid foundation for my future career. I graduated with a Bachelor of Technology in Computer Science and Engineering to start my academic career (2008-2012). I worked on two research projects in computer vision and algorithms under the guidance of my program head. These projects allowed me to explore using OpenCV, C++, OpenGL, Harr cascades, AdaBoost, and the Viola-Jones algorithm, providing me with hands-on experience in the field. As I progressed through my studies, I realized I needed a stronger foundation in computer science to excel in the area. Eager to deepen my knowledge, I turned to definitive texts like ‘Introduction to Algorithms’ by CLRS and ‘The Art of Computer Programming’ by Donald Knuth, significantly shaping my understanding of the subject. During this time, I also participated in global challenges like Topcoder, which exposed me to the design field and allowed me to apply my problem-solving skills in a creative context. This experience sparked my interest in the intersection of computer science and design, which would later become a defining aspect of my academic and professional pursuits.

_Design studies and research._ Intrigued by design, I pursued a post-graduation in Innovation and Experience Design (2013-2015) at Srishti School of Art, Design & Technology in Bangalore, India. This program allowed me to explore the design field while building upon my foundation in computer science. I had the privilege of studying under Dr Naveen Bagalkot (ITU Copenhagen + Srishti), Mr Warren Greving (Hewlett-Packard Laboratories), and Mr Atul Saraf (Usability Expert, Human Factors International), who provided valuable insights into creative experimentation, technology role in solving societal challenges, and the political nature of the design. Throughout the program, I engaged in various projects that pushed the boundaries of innovation and technology. My thesis, for instance, involved developing methods to gather more energy from piezo discs and conceptualizing products for a specific context. This work required a deep understanding of both the technical aspects of energy harvesting and the creative process of product design, showcasing my ability to navigate the intersection of these fields. Under the supervision of Dr Naveen Bagalkot, Mr Atul Saraf, and one of my peers, I published my first research paper, which focused on leveraging situated memory to enhance self-efficacy and well-being in senior citizens. This project demonstrated my ability to combine design principles with computer science knowledge to address real-world problems. It also emphasized my commitment to using my skills to make a positive impact on the lives of others, particularly in the context of ageing and well-being.

_Faculty role and ReRide Project._ Eager to further explore programming and algorithms, I accepted an invi- tation as a full-time faculty member and researcher at Srishti Manipal Institute (2017-2022). In this role, I taught mathematics, algorithms, and human-computer interaction (HCI) courses, allowing me to share my interest and ex- pertise at the intersection of design, mathematics, and technology with undergraduate and graduate students. In addition to teaching, I was an integral member of the ReRide project. This multidisciplinary research initiative focused on a platform exploring the design of personal informatics tools for motorbike commuting and helping us evaluate such tools in situ. As the lead designer and programmer for the posture-sensing module, I collaborated closely with Dr Naveen Bagalkot and Dr Tomas Sokoler (ITU Copenhagen). This collaborative effort resulted in two research papers and presentations at international conferences, including INTERACT 2017 at IIT Bombay, India, and TEI 2019 at Arizona State University, USA. These opportunities allowed me to connect with other researchers and professionals in the HCI community, further expanding my knowledge and network. My contributions extended beyond research, as I also served as chair for the Demonstrations track in IndiaHCI 2018 and as a reviewer at a few HCI conferences. This involvement enriched my professional development and demonstrated my commitment to advancing the field of HCI.

_Experimental Maths Lab and Mentoring._ At Srishti Manipal, I recognized the need to bridge the gap between design students and theoretical computer science and mathematics. I understood that fostering an interdisciplinary mindset was essential for creating innovative solutions to complex problems. To address this issue, I established the Experimental Maths Lab, an interactive space designed to nurture curiosity and creativity while allowing students to explore these subjects in a design school environment. As the head of the M.Des - Design Computation program and the faculty member, I mentored students through algorithms, computation, and HCI complexities, developing their critical thinking and problem-solving skills. Under my supervision, two thesis projects were developed, one focusing on deconstructing algorithms and the other on explainable AI and NLP. Both projects earned awards, demonstrating my commitment to fostering the next generation of researchers and the student’s ability to develop high-quality studies. Driven by my dedication to computer science and interdisciplinary learning, I have identified specific research areas for further exploration.

### Skills and Expertise

_Machine Learning and Image Processing._ My interest in machine learning and image processing stems from a desire to apply computational and statistical learning theory to engineering challenges. I have experience working with machine learning frameworks such as PyTorch, Scikit-learn, and TensorFlow, as well as statistical computing tools like R. My expertise in this area focuses on developing high-performance visualization tools for large-sized graphs and creating optimal graph drawing algorithms for OpenGL/WebGL contexts. Furthermore, I am dedicated to providing algorithmic explainability to help users understand how algorithms work and make informed decisions.

_Natural Science, Tacit Knowledge, and HCI._ I have always been fascinated by the relationship between mathematics and natural phenomena. My work in this area aims to uncover hidden or invisible knowledge that cannot be codified and explores graph theory and algorithms in natural science and tacit knowledge. As an aspiring practitioner in human-computer interaction (HCI), I am keen to explore the complex relationship between humans and computers, particularly concerning artificial intelligence and interaction design. I am also passionate about understanding ethical conflicts arising from this relationship and advocating for open-access knowledge, archiving, accessibility beyond the internet, and open-source and lesser-restricted licensing.

_Computer Science, Computer Graphics, and Visualization._ With a strong foundation in computer sci- ence, I have developed expertise in various models of computation, data structures, applications, and programming paradigms. My experience in scientific computing includes working with languages like C, C++, Lisp/Scheme, and Python, as well as microprocessors and assembly languages like x86 and 8051. Additionally, I have a deep understanding of fundamental rendering algorithms and have worked with visualization tools such as OpenGL/GLSL, Three.js, D3.js, Matplotlib, and GGPlot.

_Recreational Mathematics and Pedagogy._ I believe that recreational mathematics can be a powerful tool to facilitate engaging learning environments. By incorporating recreational mathematics activities into my pedagogy, I aim to make learning fun and captivating for students. My experience in this area involves working with theoretical mathematical models and experimental studies, such as differential equations, deterministic and statistical models, L-systems, automata, and game theory.

### Fit with the program

As I embark on my research journey, I am confident that my unique background in computer science, design, and research will make me a valuable addition to any program focusing on the intersection of technology, design, and human-computer interaction. My diverse experience, ranging from my undergraduate studies in computer science and engineering to my postgraduate work in innovation and experience design, has equipped me with a versatile skill set and a deep understanding of the interdisciplinary nature of cutting-edge research. My experience as a faculty member and researcher has allowed me to develop strong mentoring and teaching abilities, making me a valuable resource for fellow students and faculty members. Additionally, my hands-on involvement in various research projects has honed my problem-solving skills and ability to work collaboratively, further enhancing my fit within a research-driven program. Throughout my academic and professional journey, I have cultivated expertise in machine learning, image processing, natural science, tacit knowledge, and HCI. My passion for addressing real-world challenges through innovative solutions aligns with the goals of many masters programs in computer science. In summary, my diverse background, combined with my dedication to fostering the next generation of researchers and contributing to the development of innovative solutions, makes me an excellent fit for a masters program in computer science. I am excited to contribute to ongoing research and learn from esteemed faculty members while furthering my understanding of the complex relationship between technology, design, and human experience.

### Conclusion
Research interests and foundation. My research interest can be traced back to my early exposure to comput- ers and my fascination with visual arts. I found myself working with visuals and creative tools using code, eventually discovering mathematics at the center of my interests. This led me to explore the intersection of mathematics, de- sign, and computation. In recent years, my focus has shifted towards accessible and open algorithms, with the aim of democratizing remarkable techniques that can transform our society in ways we cannot yet perceive. Over the years, I have come to rely on three broad areas: (a) Mathematics, which I view as the language of decoding and design, (b) Computation, as an interface to use or leverage mathematics, and (c) Ethics, as values derived from my journey, human-centered design philosophy, and the ongoing critique of technology in society. I use these areas to structure my thoughts, ideas, and courses.

Pursuing research and academic goals. My desire to pursue research stems from spending a significant portion of the last ten years teaching various subjects within the realms of Human-Computer Interaction, Algorithms, and Mathematics. While I thoroughly enjoy teaching and plan to remain in academia or education, I have not yet dedicated myself entirely to a specific sub-domain within my areas of interest. More than the research itself, I am drawn to the idea of dedicating myself to a single research inquiry for an extended period, allowing me to stay focused and produce new knowledge. Having been part of an academic institution throughout my life, I am passionate about learning, teaching, and studying complex challenges that align with my interests. My interdisciplinary background in engineering and design provides me with the unique advantage of viewing problems from various perspectives and leveraging diverse skill sets. I am excited to delve deeper into a more defined research area and contribute new knowledge to the field.

I would like to express my gratitude for taking the time to review my personal statement. While I may not be the greatest problem solver, I pride myself on asking good questions and remaining patient as I work to effectively solve problems without losing interest. I look forward to the opportunity to further develop my skills and contribute to meaningful research within the realm of computer science.
